









                           A Guide to the Mazes of Menace


                                   Eric S. Raymond
                                 Thyrsus Enterprises
                                  Malvern, PA 19355



          1.  Introduction

               You have just finished your years as a student at the  local
          adventurer's  guild.   After much practice and sweat you have fi-
          nally completed your training and are  ready  to  embark  upon  a
          perilous  adventure.   As a test of your skills, the local guild-
          masters have sent you into the Dungeons of Doom.  Your task is to
          return with the Amulet of Yendor.  Your reward for the completion
          of this task will be a  full membership in the local  guild.   In
          addition,  you  are  allowed  to keep all the loot you bring back
          from the dungeons.

               You have abilities and strengths for dealing  with  the  ha-
          zards  of  adventure  that will vary depending on your background
          and training. Here is a summary of the character classes:

               Cavemen and Cavewomen start with  exceptional  strength  and
          neolithic weapons.

               Tourists start out with lots of gold (suitable for  shopping
          with)  and  an  expensive  camera. Most monsters don't like being
          photographed.

               Wizards start out with a fair selection of  magical  goodies
          and a particular affinity for things thaumaturgical.

               Archeologists understand dungeons pretty  well.  This  makes
          them  able  to move quickly and sneak up on dungeon nasties. They
          start equipped with proper tools for a scientific expedition.

               Elves are agile and quick and have keen senses; very  little
          of what goes on around an Elf will escape him or her. The quality
          of Elven craftsmanship often gives them an advantage  in  weapons
          and armor.

               Valkyries are hardy warrior women. Their upbringing  in  the
          harsh Northlands makes them strong and inures them to extremes of
          cold, and instills stealth and cunning in them.

               Healers are wise in the apothecary and  medical  arts.  They
          know  the  herbs  and  simples that can restore vitality and ease


          A Guide to the Mazes of Menace                                  1






          A Guide to the Mazes of Menace                                  2


          pain and neutralize poisons, and they can divine a being's  state
          of health or sickness.

               Knights are distinguished from the common run of fighter  by
          their devotion to the ideal of chivalry and the surpassing excel-
          lence of their armor.

               Barbarians are warriors out of the hinterland,  hardened  to
          battle.   They  begin  their  quests  with  naught  but  uncommon
          strength, a trusty hauberk, and a great two-handed sword.

               Samurai are the elite warriors of feudal  Nippon.  They  are
          lightly  armored  and  quick, and wear the dai-sho, two swords of
          the deadliest sharpness.

               Ninja are the spy-assassins of Japan.  They  are  quick  and
          stealthy,  though not as strong as fighters. Their characteristic
          weapon is the deadly shuriken or throwing-star.

               Priests and Priestesses are clerics militant, armed and  ar-
          mored  to  advance  the  cause of righteousness but also equipped
          with some skills in arts thaumaturgic. Their ability  to  commune
          with  deities  via prayer occasionally extricates them from peril
          -- but can also put them in it.

               You set out on your way to the dungeons  and  after  several
          days  of  uneventful  travel, you see the ancient ruins that mark
          the entrance to the Mazes of Menace.  It is late  at  night,   so
          you  make camp at the entrance and spend the night sleeping under
          the open skies.   In the morning you gather your weapons and dev-
          ices, eat what is almost your last food, and enter the dungeons.

          2.  What is going on here?

               You have just begun a game of nethack.  Your goal is to grab
          as  much  treasure as you can, find the Amulet of Yendor, and get
          out of the Mazes of Menace alive.  On the screen, a map of  where
          you have been and what you have seen on the current dungeon level
          is kept.  As you explore more of the level,  it  appears  on  the
          screen in front of you.

               Nethack differs from most computer fantasy games (other than
          its  ancestors  hack and rogue and its cousin larn) in that it is
          screen oriented.  Commands are all one or two keystrokes (as  op-
          posed to sentences in some losing parser's notion of English) and
          the results of your commands are  displayed  graphically  on  the
          screen  rather  than  being  explained in words (a minimum screen
          size of 24 lines by  80  columns is required; if  the  screen  is
          larger, only a 24x80 section will be used for the map).

               Another major difference between nethack and other  computer
          fantasy  games  is that once you have solved all the puzzles in a
          standard fantasy game, it has lost most of its excitement and  it
          ceases  to  be  fun.  Nethack, on the other hand, generates a new


          Nethack Version 2.0                            September 25, 1987






          A Guide to the Mazes of Menace                                  3


          dungeon every time you play it and even the authors still find it
          an entertaining and exciting game.

          3.  What do all those things on the screen mean?

               In order to understand what is going on in nethack you  have
          to first get some grasp of what nethack is doing with the screen.
          The nethack screen is intended to replace the  "You can see  ..."
          descriptions of text fantasy games.  Figure 1 is a sample of what
          a nethack screen might look like.

          3.1.  The bottom line

               At the bottom line of the screen are a  few pieces of  cryp-
          tic  information  describing your current status.  Here is an ex-
          planation of what these things mean:

          Level
               This number indicates how deep you have gone in the dungeon.
               It  starts  at  one  and  goes  up as you go deeper into the
               dungeon.

          Gold The number of gold pieces you have managed to find and  keep
               with you so far.

          Hp   Your current and maximum health points.   Health points  in-
               dicate  how  much  damage  you can take before you die.  The
               more you get hit in a fight, the lower they get.    You  can
               regain  health points by resting.  The number in parentheses
               is the maximum number your health points can reach.

               ____________________________________________________________

                   ------------
                   |..........+
                   |..@....]..|
                   |....B.....|
                   |..........|
                   -----+------



               Lev 1  Gp 0  Hp 12(12) Ep 3(3)  Ac 8  Str 16(16)  Exp: 1/0
               ____________________________________________________________

                                         Figure 1


          Ep   Energy points. This tells you the level of mystic energy you
               have  available for spell casting. When you type `x' to list
               your spells, each will have a spell point cost beside it  in
               parentheses. You will not see this if your site's version of
               the game has been configured to omit spells.



          Nethack Version 2.0                            September 25, 1987






          A Guide to the Mazes of Menace                                  4


          Ac   Your current armor protection.  This  number  indicates  how
               effective  your  armor  is in stopping blows from unfriendly
               creatures.  The lower this number is, the more effective the
               armor.

          Str  Your current strength and maximum ever strength.   This  can
               be  any integer less than or equal to 18, or greater than or
               equal to three (occasionally you may get super-strengths  of
               the  form  18/xx).  The higher the number,  the stronger you
               are. The number in the parentheses is the  maximum  strength
               you have attained so far this game.

          Exp  These two numbers give your current experience level and ex-
               perience  points.    As  you  do things, you gain experience
               points.   At certain experience point totals,  you  gain  an
               experience level.   The more experienced you are, the better
               you are able to fight and to withstand magical attacks.

          3.2.  The top line

               The top line of the screen is reserved for printing messages
          that  describe  things that are impossible to represent visually.
          If you see a  "--More--"  on  the  top  line,   this  means  that
          nethack  wants  to  print  another  message on the screen, but it
          wants to make certain that you have read the one  that  is  there
          first.  To read the next message, just type a space.

          3.3.  The rest of the screen

               The rest of the screen is the map of the level as  you  have
          explored  it so far.   Each symbol on the screen represents some-
          thing.  Here is a list of what the various symbols mean:

          - and |
               These form the walls of a room (or maze).

          .    this is the floor of a room.

          #    this is a corridor.

          >    this is the staircase to the next level.

          <    the staircase to the previous level.

          `    A large boulder.

          @    You (usually) or another human.

          ^    A trap.

          )    A weapon of some sort.

          (    Some other useful object (key, rope, dynamite, camera...)



          Nethack Version 2.0                            September 25, 1987






          A Guide to the Mazes of Menace                                  5


          [    A suit of armor.

          %    A piece of food (not necessarily healthy...).

          /    A wand.

          =    A ring.

          ?    A scroll.

          !    A magic potion.

          +    A spellbook containing a spell you can learn; (but usually a
               doorway).

          }    A pool of water

          {    A fountain (your dungeon may not have these).

          \    An opulent throne (You may not have this either).

          $    A pile or pot of gold.

          a-zA-Z
               The uppercase letters represent the various  inhabitants  of
               the  Mazes  of Menace.  Watch out, they can be nasty and vi-
               cious.  Sometimes, however, they can be helpful.

          4.  Commands

               Commands are given to nethack by typing one or  two  charac-
          ters.   Most  commands  can be preceded by a count to repeat them
          (e.g. typing "10s" will do ten  searches).   Commands  for  which
          counts  make  no sense have the count ignored.  To cancel a count
          or a prefix, type <ESCAPE>.  The list of commands is rather long,
          but  it can be read at any time during the game with the "?" com-
          mand.  Here it is for reference, with a short explanation of each
          command.

          ?    help: print a help list.

          Q    Quit the game.

          S    Save the game.

          !    Escape to a shell.

          ^Z   Suspend the game (UNIX versions with job control only).

          <    up: go up the staircase (if you are standing on it).

          >    down: go down (just like up).




          Nethack Version 2.0                            September 25, 1987






          A Guide to the Mazes of Menace                                  6


          [kjhlyubn]
               go one step in the direction indicated.

                   k: north (i.e., to the top of the screen),
                   j: south, h: west, l: east, y: ne, u: nw, b: se, n: sw.

          KJHLYUBN
               Go in that direction until you hit a wall or run into  some-
               thing.

          m[kjhlyubn]
               prefix: move without picking up any objects.

          M[kjhlyubn]
               prefix: move far, no pickup.

          g[kjhlyubn]
               prefix: move until something interesting is found.

          G[kjhlyubn]
               as previous, but forking of corridors is not considered  in-
               teresting.

          i    print your inventory.

          I    print selected parts of your inventory, like in

                   I* - all gems in inventory;
                   IU - all unpaid items;
                   IX - all used up items that are on your shopping bill;
                   I$ - count your money.

          s    search for secret doors and traps around you.

          ^    ask for the type of a trap you found earlier.

          )    ask for current wielded weapon.

          [    ask for current armor.

          =    ask for current rings.

          $    count how many gold pieces you are carrying.

          .    rest, do nothing.

          ,    pick up some things.

          :    look at what is here.

          ^T   teleport.

          ^R   redraw the screen.



          Nethack Version 2.0                            September 25, 1987






          A Guide to the Mazes of Menace                                  7


          ^P   repeat last message (subsequent  ^P's  repeat  earlier  mes-
               sages).

          /    (followed by any symbol) tell what this symbol represents.If
               you  see  fancy  graphics  on  your screen it may ask you to
               specify a location rather than taking a symbol argument.

          \    tell what has been discovered.

          e    eat food.

          w    wield weapon. w- means: wield nothing, use bare hands.

          q    drink (quaff) a potion.

          r    read a scroll.

          T    Takeoff armor.  Remove Ring.

          W    Wear armor.

          P    Put on a ring.

          X    transcribe (learn) a spell.

          x    print a list of know spells.

          z    zap a wand.

          Z    zap a spell; same as the `# cast' extended command

          t    throw an object or shoot an arrow.

          p    pay your shopping bill.

          d    drop something. d7a: drop seven items of object a.

          D    Drop several things.  In answer to the question "What  kinds
               of  things  do  you  want to drop? [!%= au]" you should give
               zero or more object symbols possibly followed by 'a'  and/or
               'u'.

          a    apply - Generic command for using a key to lock or unlock  a
               door, using a camera, using a rope, etc.

          c    call: name a certain object or class of objects.

          C    Call: Name an individual monster.

          E    Engrave: Write a message in  the  dust  on  the  floor.   E-
               means: use fingers for writing.

          O    Set options. You will be asked to enter an option line.   If
               this  is empty, the current options are reported.  Otherwise


          Nethack Version 2.0                            September 25, 1987






          A Guide to the Mazes of Menace                                  8


               it should be a list of options separated by commas. Possible
               boolean   options   are:  oneline,  time,  news,  tombstone,
               rest_on_space, fixinvlet, beginner, male, female.  They  can
               be negated by prefixing them with answer to the question"Who
               are you?"; it may  have  a  suffix.  A  compound  option  is
               endgame;  it  is  followed by a description of what parts of
               the list of topscorers should be printed when  the  game  is
               finished.  There  is  also  a  graphics option that sets the
               characters used for screen displays. Usually  one  will  not
               want  to  use  the  'O'  command,  but instead put a HACKOP-
               TIONS="...." line in one's environment.

          v    print version number.

          V    display the game history (about one page).

               You can put a number before most  commands  to  repeat  them
          that many times, as in "20s" or "40.".

          5.  Rooms

               Rooms in the dungeons are either lit or dark.   If you  walk
          into  a  lit room, the entire room will be drawn on the screen as
          soon as you enter.  If you walk into a dark room, it will only be
          displayed  as  you explore it.  Upon leaving a room, all monsters
          inside the room are erased from the screen.   In the darkness you
          can  only see one space in all directions around you.  A corridor
          is always dark.

          6.  Fighting

               If you see a monster and you wish to fight it,  just attempt
          to  run into it.  Many times a monster you find will mind its own
          business unless you attack it.  It is often the case that discre-
          tion is the better part of valor.

          7.  Objects you can find

               When you find something in the dungeon, it is common to want
          to  pick the object up.  This is accomplished in nethack by walk-
          ing over the object (unless you use the  "m"  prefix, see above).
          If  you  are  carrying too many things, the program will tell you
          and it won't pick up the object,  otherwise it  will  add  it  to
          your pack and tell you what you just picked up.

               Many of the commands that operate on objects must prompt you
          to  find  out  which  object you want to use.  If you change your
          mind and don't want to do that command after all,  just  type  an
          <ESCAPE> and the command will be aborted.

               Some objects, like armor and weapons, are  easily  differen-
          tiated.   Others,   like  scrolls  and  potions, are given labels
          which vary according to type.  During a game, any two of the same
          kind  of  object with the same label are the same type.  However,


          Nethack Version 2.0                            September 25, 1987






          A Guide to the Mazes of Menace                                  9


          the labels will vary from game to game.

               When you use one of these labeled objects,  if its effect is
          obvious, nethack will remember what it is for you.  If its effect
          isn't extremely obvious you will be asked what you want to scrib-
          ble  on  it  so  you  will recognize it later, or you can use the
          "call" command (see above).

          7.1.  Weapons

               Some weapons, like arrows, come in bunches,  but  most  come
          one  at  a   time.   In order to use a weapon, you must wield it.
          To fire an arrow out of a  bow,  you must first  wield  the  bow,
          then  throw  the arrow.  You can only wield one weapon at a time,
          but you can't change weapons if the one you are currently  wield-
          ing  is  cursed.  The commands to use weapons are "w" (wield) and
          "t" (throw).

          7.2.  Armor

               There are  various  sorts  of  armor  lying  around  in  the
          dungeon.    Some  of it is enchanted, some is cursed, and some is
          just normal.  Different armor types have different armor  protec-
          tion.    The higher the armor protection, the more protection the
          armor affords against the blows of monsters.  Here is  a  partial
          list of the various armor types and the level of armor protection
          each will give.

                       plate mail               3
                       splint mail              4
                       banded mail              4
                       chain mail               5
                       scale mail               6
                       ring mail                7
                       studded leather armor    7
                       leather armor            8
                       elven cloak              9

               If a piece of armor is enchanted, its armor protection  will
          be  higher  than normal.  If a suit of armor is cursed, its armor
          protection will be lower, and you will not be able to remove  it.
          However,  not all armor with a protection that is lower than nor-
          mal is cursed and some enchanted armor is also "cursed"  prevent-
          ing removal.

               The commands to use weapons are  "W"  (wear)  and  "T" (take
          off).

          7.3.  Scrolls

               Scrolls come with titles in an unknown  tongue.   After  you
          read  a scroll, it disappears from your pack.  The command to use
          a scroll is "r" (read).



          Nethack Version 2.0                            September 25, 1987






          A Guide to the Mazes of Menace                                 10


          7.4.  Potions

               Potions are labeled by the color of the  liquid  inside  the
          flask.  They disappear after being quaffed.  The command to use a
          scroll is "q" (quaff).

          7.5.  Staves and Wands

               Staves and wands do the same kinds of things.    Staves  are
          identified  by  a type of wood; wands by a type of metal or bone.
          They are generally things you want to do to something over a long
          distance,  so  you  must point them at what you wish to affect to
          use them.   Some staves are not affected by  the  direction  they
          are  pointed,  though.   Staves come with multiple magic charges,
          the number being random, and when they are used up, the staff  is
          just a piece of wood or metal.

               The command to use a wand or staff is "z" (zap)

          7.6.  Rings

               Rings are very useful items, since they are relatively  per-
          manent  magic,   unlike  the usually fleeting effects of potions,
          scrolls, and staves.  Of course, both good and bad rings are more
          powerful.    Most rings also cause you to use up food more rapid-
          ly, the rate varying with the type of ring.  Rings are  differen-
          tiated  by their stone settings.  Some rings are cursed, prevent-
          ing removal.  This can happen to helpful and harmful rings alike.

               The commands to use rings are "P" (put on) and "R" (remove).

          7.7.  Spellbooks

               Spellbooks are tomes of mighty magic.  When  read  with  the
          `transcribe'  command  X,  they plant the knowledge of a spell in
          your head and disappear - unless the attempt backfires. Reading a
          spellbook  can  be  harmful to your health if it is cursed or the
          mystic runes are at  too  high  a  level  for  your  thaumaturgic
          skills!

               Casting spells can also backfire.  If you attempt to cast  a
          spell  well above your level, or cast it at a time when your luck
          is particularly bad, you can end up wasting both the  energy  and
          the time required in casting.

               The `x' command lists your current spells, each preceded  by
          the  spell  points  they  require.  to cast a spell, type `Z' and
          answer the questions.

          7.8.  Food

               Food is necessary to keep you going.   If you  go  too  long
          without  eating you will faint, and eventually die of starvation.
          The command to use food is "e" (eat).


          Nethack Version 2.0                            September 25, 1987






          A Guide to the Mazes of Menace                                 11


          7.9.  Options

               Due to variations in personal tastes and conceptions of  the
          way  nethack should do things, there are a set of options you can
          set that cause nethack to behave in various different ways.

          7.10.  Setting the options

               There are two ways to set the options.   The first  is  with
          the   "O"   command  of nethack;  the second is with the "HACKOP-
          TIONS" environment variable.

          7.11.  Using the `O' command

               When you type "O" in nethack, it queries you for  an  option
          string which is parsed as though it were a HACKOPTIONS value.

          7.12.  Using the HACKOPTIONS variable

               The HACKOPTIONS variable is a string  containing  a   comma-
          separated list of initial values for the various options. Boolean
          variables can be turned on by listing their name or turned off by
          putting  a  `!' or "no" in front of the name.  You can set string
          variables by following the variable name with a colon (this char-
          acter  was  chosen over = to avoid conflict with the ring symbol)
          and the value of the string. The value is terminated by the  next
          comma or the end of string.

               Thus to set up an environment variable so that  `female'  is
          on,  `pickup'  is  off, and the name is set to "Blue Meanie", you
          would enter the command

               % setenv HACKOPTIONS "female,!pickup,name:Blue Meanie"

          in csh, or

               $ HACKOPTIONS="female,!pickup,name:Blue Meanie"
               $ export HACKOPTIONS

          in sh or ksh.

          7.13.  Customization options

               Here is a list of the options and  an  explanation  of  what
          each  one  is  for.    The  default value for each is enclosed in
          square brackets.  For character string options, input over  fifty
          characters will be ignored.

               Note: some of the options listed may be inactive if the game
          has been subsetted.

          standout
               (default on)  use  standout  where  appropriate  in  display
               lists.


          Nethack Version 2.0                            September 25, 1987






          A Guide to the Mazes of Menace                                 12


          null
               (default off) don't send padding nulls to the tty.

          tombstone
               (default on) display tombstone graphic on death.

          news
               (default on) read hack news if present.

          conf
               (default on) have user confirm attacks  on  dogs  and  shop-
               keepers.

          silent
               (default on) suppress terminal beeps.

          pick
               (default on) pick up things you move onto by default.

          IBMB
               (default off, PC-HACK only) for machines with an IBM-PC com-
               patible BIOS ROM.

          DECR
               (default off, PC-HACK only) for machines  with  DEC  Rainbow
               compatible BIOS ROMs.

          rawi
               (default off) force raw (not cbreak mode) input.

          sort
               (default on) sort the pack contents by type when  displaying
               inventory.

          packorder
               (default `)[%?+/=!(*0  )')  specify  order  to  list  object
               types  in.  The value of this option should be a string con-
               taining the symbols for the various object types.

          dogname
               give your (first) dog a name (eg. dogname:Fang).

          time
               (default off) show game time in turns on bottom line.

          restonspace
               (default off) make spacebar a synonym for `.'.

          fixinv
               (default on) an object's inventory letter sticks to it until
               it's  dropped.   If  this is off, everything after a dropped
               object shifts letters.




          Nethack Version 2.0                            September 25, 1987






          A Guide to the Mazes of Menace                                 13


          male
               (default  on,  most  hackers  are  male)  sets  the  player-
               character's sex.

          female
               (default  off)  sets  the  player-character's  sex   (equal-
               opportunity feature :-)).

          name
               (defaults to player's username) Set  the  player-character's
               name.

          graphics
               (default ` |-++++.:<>^{}\"') set the  graphics  symbols  for
               screen  displays.   The  graphics option (if used) should be
               last, followed by a string of up to ", 17 chars to  be  used
               instead  of the default map-drawing chars. Replacing for any
               of these chars causes it to be replaced in the dungeon level
               displays,  except  that the five instances of + are used for
               top left, top right, bottom  left,  bottom  right  and  door
               squares  respectively. The last four characters are required
               only if the corresponding options are configured in.

          endgame
               Endgame is followed by a description of what  parts  of  the
               scorelist you want to see. You might for example say:

               `endgame:own scores/5 top scores/4 around my score'.

               In the PC-HACK version, options may be set in  a  configura-
               tion file on disk as well as from the hack options.

          7.14.  Scoring

               Nethack usually maintains a list of the top  scoring  people
          or scores on your machine.  Depending on how it is set up, it can
          post either the top scores or the top  players.   In  the  latter
          case,   each account on the machine can post only one non-winning
          score on this list.   If you score higher than  someone  else  on
          this list, or better your previous score on the list, you will be
          inserted in the proper place under your current name.   How  many
          scores are kept can also be set up by whoever installs it on your
          machine.

               If you quit the game, you get out with all of your gold  in-
          tact.    If,   however,   you get killed in the Dungeons of Doom,
          your body is forwarded to your next-of-kin, along  with  90%   of
          your  gold;  ten  percent  of  your gold is kept by the Dungeons'
          wizard as a fee.  This should make you consider whether you  want
          to  take  one last hit at that monster and possibly live, or quit
          and thus stop with whatever you have.  If you quit,  you  do  get
          all your gold, but if you swing and live, you might find more.




          Nethack Version 2.0                            September 25, 1987






          A Guide to the Mazes of Menace                                 14


               If you just want to see what the current top players/  games
          list is, you can type

               % nethack -s

          8.  Credits

               The original hack game was modeled on the Berkeley UNIX `ro-
          gue' game.  Large portions of this paper were shamelessly cribbed
          from A Guide to the Dungeons of Doom, by Michael C. Toy and  Ken-
          neth C. R. C. Arnold.

               NetHack is the product of literally dozens of people's work.
          A  list of some of those who made major additions to the game ap-
          pears below:

          Jay Fenlason
               wrote the original release of "Hack",  with  helpfrom  Kenny
               Woodland, Mike Thome and Jon Payne.

          Andries Brouwer
               did a major re-write on the program andpublshed  (at  least)
               two versions to the Usenet.

          Don G. Kneller
               ported the 1.0.3 version of Hack to  the  PC,  creating  PC-
               Hack.

               The following folks didn't actually re-write  the  game,  or
          port it to a new machine, but have made significant contributions
          to the playability of the game:

          ins_akaa@jhunix.UUCP (Ken Arromdee)
               New character classes. New weapons code. Armor  weights  im-
               plemented. New tools code. Polymorph Self code. Bug fixes.

          srt@ucla-cs (Scott R. Turner)
               Rockmole & Keystone Kops code. Squeaky Board & Magic  traps.
               Fountain code.  More bug fixes.

          gil@cornell.UUCP (Gil Neiger)
               Magic Marker code. Fountain code enhancements.  Enhancements
               to dozens of routines. More bug fixes (esp. in hack.zap.c).

          ericb@hplsla.UUCP (Eric Backus)
               The #dip mods to fountain code. Yet more bug fixes.

          mike@genat.UUCP (Mike Stephenson)
               New character classes and traps.  Throne  Rooms.  Spellbooks
               and  spellcasting.   Praying.  Endgame enhancements. Nethack
               release and coordination.

          eric@snark (Eric S. Raymond)
               The GRAPHICS option. Changes to make character classes  more


          Nethack Version 2.0                            September 25, 1987






          A Guide to the Mazes of Menace                                 15


               individual  and  mythohistorically authentic. Better random-
               number generation. The blindfold tool. The 'Z'  spellcasting
               command  synonym. General cleanup of much grotty code, remo-
               val of magic numbers. More  bug  fixes.  This  Guide  you're
               reading.

               You too can enhance this game and join the hallowed ranks of
          the net.benefactors. Happy hacking!

          Appendix A: Weapon Types in Hack

               This material is adapted from a digest of email  replies  to
          Carole Chang (carole@uhcc.uhccux.ha). Major sources were:

                       Paul Anderson           pha@net1.ucsd.edu
                       Vernon Lee              scorpion@rice.edu
                       Bryan Ewbank            ihlph!bdewbank

          Some terminological corrections (notably the correct set of  dis-
          tinctions  for the great mace/morningstar/flail controversy) were
          made by your editor (eric@snark), and a good  bit  of  historical
          context added.


          8.1.  Polearms

               The following weapons are all "pole arms", meaning that they
          are  wooden  shafts  (5-9' long) capped with a particular weapon-
          head. We list these first as they are most likely  to  mystify  a
          novice hacker.

          glaive
               a short polearm with a straight blade  at  the  end  of  the
               shaft.  Rare in Europe; more popular in non-Western cultures
               under other names, as in the Zulu war assegai  and  Japanese
               ashigaru's pike.

          halberd
               a long (typically 6' or more) polearm ending with  a  single
               axe-head,  backed  by a spike and tipped by a spear-head. An
               extremely popular weapon in Europe from the Dark Ages to  as
               late as 1650. You can see them in pictures of royal or elite
               Spanish, English, and French troops or the  Vatican's  Swiss
               Guards.

          bill-guisarme
               a polearm, ends in a spear-head with a spike on one side and
               a hook on the other.

          fauchard
               a polearm topped by a curved sickle-blade.

          bec-de-corbin
               (literally  "crow's-beak")  a  polearm  ending  in  a  stout


          Nethack Version 2.0                            September 25, 1987






          A Guide to the Mazes of Menace                                 16


               spear-point,  with  a small axe-head on one side and a beak-
               shaped spike on the other. This weapon was designed  to  act
               like   a  can-opener  for  infantry  fighting  plate-armored
               knights.

          guisarme
               a polearm, ends with a sharpened pruning hook.

          spetum
               a polearm, ends with a spear-blade that has a smaller  blade
               jutting  at an angle from either side; the idea was to catch
               an opponent's weapon between two blades and disarm him  with
               a twist of the shaft.  Compare the japanese sai.

          partisan
               a polearm, has a spear-head with a small axe-head to  either
               side.  Peasant  levies often carried these; hence our modern
               usage of  `partisans'  to  describe  guerilla  or  irregular
               troops.

          lucern
               a polearm, ends  in  a  forward-pointing  and  one  or  more
               curved,  downward-pointing (i.e.perpendicular) spikes. Named
               after the Swiss city and canton of Lucerne.

          voulge
               a polearm, with a straight single-edged blade depending from
               one side of the shaft's end.

          ranseur
               a polearm, ends with a broad spear-head with  a  flat  base,
               and  a broader "hilt" (often a straight piece with sharpened
               ends) behind it. As with the spetum, the idea was  to  catch
               weapons between the blade and "hilt".



          8.2.  Blade weapons

               Blades were, in most  pre-gunpowder  martial  cultures,  the
          preferred  weapon for one-on-one combat. Nethack includes several
          kinds:

          dagger
               broadly speaking, could describe any blade less  than  about
               two  feet  long.  But  `dagger'  tends  to suggest a hilted,
               double-edged weapon.

          short
               are 2-3' long and used for stabbing. The  Roman  legionary's
               gladius  and  the  American  frontiersman's Bowie knife were
               both short swords.




          Nethack Version 2.0                            September 25, 1987






          A Guide to the Mazes of Menace                                 17


          broad
               are 3-4' long; they have sharpened edged  for  chopping  and
               cleaving.

          long are also 3-4' long; they are narrower  with  sharpened  tips
               for stabbing and slashing.

          two-handed
               are 5-6' long, with long handles because they  require  both
               hands to use.

          bastard
               a cleaving weapon 4-5' long, which can be wielded  with  one
               or (more effectively) two hands.

          scimitar
               a type of curved, single-edged blade popular  since  ancient
               times  in  the  Near East, designed for slashing and drawing
               strokes. Recent European weapons modeled on it  include  the
               sabre and cutlass.

          katana
               the long, slender, sabre-like swords of the  Japanese  samu-
               rai,  often  considered  the finest blade weapons ever made.
               Japanese forging techniques produced what was  in  effect  a
               micro-layered  composite of high and low carbon steels, giv-
               ing the blade its unique razor-sharpness and flexibility.


          8.3.  Missile weapons

               These are all weapons meant to transfer kinetic energy to  a
          target via a rigid thrown projectile.

          bow  in nethack, probably represents the 'self  bow',  a  smaller
               single-piece  or  composite bow firing short feather-quilled
               arrows (rather than the classic Robin Hood longbow with  its
               yard-long shafts).

          crossbow
               a mechanically-cranked  bow  firing  stubby  conical-profile
               bolts,  sometimes  finned. Had a lower rate of fire than the
               self- or long-bow but fearsome penetrating power.

          javelin
               a lightweight, flexible throwing spear.

          dart not the three-inch, needle-pointed pub dart associated  with
               ale  and  tweed  caps;  rather,  its  progenitor,  a shorter
               javelin-like projectile that was mostly soft-iron head. Bar-
               rages  of  these  were  thrown  as first volleys in infantry
               skirmishes to foul the opponents' shields.




          Nethack Version 2.0                            September 25, 1987






          A Guide to the Mazes of Menace                                 18


          shuriken
               a flat, spiked wheel designed to be  thrown  with  a  wrist-
               flick  so  the  blades  spin like a buzz-saw in flight. Also
               called a `throwing star' or (in India) the `chakram'.


          8.4.  Miscellaneous strange weapons

          bardiche
               (literally, "bearded axe") a short shaft (5') with an  enor-
               mous  long axe-head, connected at at least two places. Basi-
               cally a huge axe (or a short voulge).

          morning-star
               usually a spiked ball attached by a chain  to  a  truncheon-
               like  handle.  The  term is sometimes used to describe maces
               with spiked heads.

          flail
               several chains, possibly  spiked  and  possibly  with  small
               balls on the ends, stapled to a truncheon.

          crysknife
               a fantasy weapon adapted from Frank Herbert's "Dune"  books.
               On  Herbert's Arrakis, the fierce Fremen made their personal
               weapons from the scimitar teeth of the shai hulud, the great
               sandworms of the Dune deserts.

          aklys
               a long thong with a weight at the end. Holding the other end
               of  the thong, you throw the weight; the thong entangles the
               target, and the weight whaps it.
























          Nethack Version 2.0                            September 25, 1987



