NetHack 3.1 is a product of two years of intensive work by the NetHack
Development Team and its Amiga, Atari, Macintosh, OS/2, MSDOS, and VMS
ports sub-teams.  These include over thirty members from different
countries.  The team wishes to express its gratitude to the management
of linc.cis.upenn.edu for its generous support of this unique development
activity.

NetHack 3.1 is a new generation of NetHack.  Here is a list of some of
its main new features:

* Unlike 3.0, NetHack 3.1 is a multi-dungeon game.  New dungeons "branch"
  off the main dungeon at different locations.

* A unifying mythology was adopted for the game.  There are tasks which
  must be completed in various dungeons before the main task of capturing
  the Amulet can be undertaken.  There are different quests for the
  different character classes.

* There is a new multi-level endgame full of surprises.

* Many of the monsters in NetHack 3.1 now can wield weapons, zap wands,
  read scrolls, and cast spells.  Fighting them must take these special
  abilities into consideration.

* The game's display was completely re-written.  It is now based on a
  line-of-sight principle, and it gives a new "feel" to the game.  The
  new display was written with a standardized window interface, which
  allows easy substitution and addition of windowing systems independent
  of operating system.  For example, the UNIX port now supports X11 as
  well as the traditional tty.

* Numerous local changes were made, and many new monsters, objects, and
  intelligent artifacts were added.

You will discover the details and the rest of the changes for yourselves.

As we did with 3.0, we will periodically release patchlevel revisions of
NetHack 3.1, which will include bug fixes and further development results.
Avoid applying free-lanced patches, if you want to take advantage of these
patchlevel updates.

Despite our effort, there are, no doubt, many bugs still in the code.
The Amiga and Macintosh ports, in particular, still have rough edges due
to time constraints on their port-team members.  A port to Windows NT is
underway but is not suitable for release at this time.  We call upon you
to help in debugging both the game and the ports.  The address of the
NetHack development team remains nethack-bugs@linc.cis.upenn.edu.

As always, your comments and suggestions will be appreciated.  Enjoy.

