            Macintosh-specific help file for NetHack 3.1

The following are options, features, or concerns specific to the
Macintosh port of NetHack 3.1.  Bug reports, suggestions, comments,
and so on, should be addressed to:

To: nethack-bugs@linc.cis.upenn.edu
Subject: Mac NetHack 3.1

Please include your machine-type, system software version and other
relevant information (i.e. system extensions, monitor, accelerators
and so on).


=== Configuration of a playground
    NetHack 3.1 is packaged in a Dungeon Folder which includes:
    NetHack - the application file itself.
    NetHack Defaults - text file for default option settings.
    miscellaneous text files - Record and logfile.  logfile
        will be created if it doesn't exist.
    various special level files (with a ".lev" suffix).
    various help and other utility NetHack documents.

    During play another file type appears:
    player level files (labelled "iName.n", i is a constant number,
        Name is the player name and n is the dungeon level).

    Two other types of files will appear in the Dungeon Folder
        as a result of playing NetHack:
    bones files (of previously deceased players).
    saved games (labelled "save/iName", i is a number, same as above,
        and Name is the player name).

    The following files or file types may be thrown away:
    logfile - if it becomes too large.  A new one will be generated.
    player level files _not_ belonging to a game in progress.
        Alternatively, these files may be processed by a utility
        application, Recover (not included in this distribution).
    Old bones files and saved games.

=== Resuming a saved game
    Double-click (or open) the desired saved game file or open NetHack
        and answer the "Who are you?" dialog with the player name of
        the saved game in the Dungeon Folder.

=== Windows
    Dungeon Map, Message and Status are the essential windows used
        for play.  As needed, Info windows are generated and may be
        dismissed (clicking the close box or hitting the space bar
        when that window is frontmost) at any time.  Special inventory
        and list windows also appear in the front from time to time
        and are dismissed by hitting the space bar (or Return or
        Enter keys).  Hitting the ESCape key will dismiss a window
        without scrolling to the end.

    The Extended command "Window Cleanup" may be used to restore the
        the startup sizes and locations of the essential windows.  The
        window positions are saved in a file labelled "NetHack Windows"
        in the appropriate preferences folder.

=== Default options
    The following options are specific to the Macintosh port:
    MACgraphics  - use enhanced dungeon map symbols [TRUE]
    large_font   - use 12 point font instead of 9 point font [FALSE]
    popup_dialog - use real dialogs for question prompts [FALSE]

    large_font is currently a pre-game option and has no effect
        after the Dungeon Map, Message and Status windows are created.

    Default options may be set by editing the NetHack Defaults text
        file (possibly using TeachText or your favorite editor).
        Unix(tm)-style notation is used, as in:
    OPTIONS=name:Arnold,time,!tombstone

    See option help (?f or ?g) for more details.

=== Movement by mouse
    The shape (direction) of the cursor over the Dungeon Map window,
    typically, indicates the direction that you desire to move in when
    the mouse is clicked.  Modifier keys affect mouse-movement in the
    same way that they affect keyboard movement.  Clicking on yourself
    means rest one turn and Shift-clicking on yourself means "open door"
    in the subsequently indicated direction.

=== Sounds
    Real sounds (resources) have been added for various instruments.
    The option "silent" [FALSE] controls whether or not a sound will
    be heard when an instrument is applied.

=== Debugging-Mode
    Open NetHack and answer "wizard" to the "Who are you?" dialog.
    The debug-mode (wizard-mode) commands are then listed in the
    help menu, ?k.

    WARNING: This mode is only intended for developers and others
    interested in characterizing bugs.  Using this mode for other
    purposes will have confusing results and may significantly
    decrease your enjoyment of the game!
