This file is sys/be/README.  It is for those intending to compile
NetHack 3.2.2 on a BeBox running BeOS 1.1d8.

BeBox NetHack currently only supports the TTY windowing system.  In
order to compile it, it would benefit you greatly to think of your Be
system as a unix variant.  It is possible to compile using the
Metrowerks IDE -- the Mac port of Nethack uses the Metrowerks compiler.
However, there are four executables and several steps involved in making
NetHack.  Unless you are extremely familiar with the build sequence, I
suggest you avoid it for now.  Let the Unix Makefiles take care of all
that for you.

Suggestions:
+ Set your tty window to be at least 80x24.  NetHack
+ Change the font to Courier New (or Courier New Bold) and set the font
  size to be larger.  The font size will not change for Kate.

Known problems:
+ No special characters for walls.  None of the fonts available for use
  in a tty window has the graphics characters needed to improve the look.
  If such a font existed, then all you need to do is set the dungeon,
  object, and/or monter mappings in your defaults file.
+ NetHack is supposed to recognize that the background of the window is
  white and change itself accordingly.  It doesn't and makes the assumption
  that the background is black.  This is annoying, but playable.
  It may be that the correct code sequence is being executed -- its hard
  to tell in that particular file.  A couple of combinations have been
  tried, with no success.
+ The arrow keys don't work.



Build instructions.  From a freshly unpacked source tree:

1. Copy the Makfiles in sys/unix to their proper spots.  You can
   use setup.sh or copy them by hand.  It may be helpful to read
   sys/unix/Install.unx.

2. Edit src/Makefile:
	o Change System to SysBe.
	o Comment out the Unix versions of SYSSRC and SYSOBJ variables.
	o Uncomment the Be versions of SYSRC and SYSOBJ.
	o Uncomment the BeBox versions CC, CFLAGS, LD, and LFLAGS.
	o Comment out the default CFLAGS and LFLAGS.
	o Change WINTTYLIB to be -ltermcap.

3. Edit util/Makefile:
	o Uncomment the BeBox versions of CC and CFLAGS.
	o Comment out the default CFLAGS and LFLAGS.
	o Change YACC and LEX to be bison -y and flex respectively.

4. Edit include/config.h to change HACKDIR to be the location of your
   install directory.  You may want to uncomment the DLB define.

5. Edit top level Makefile and change GAMEDIR to match HACKDIR in
   include/config.h.  Make sure the path to GAMEDIR exists.  Change
   SHELLDIR to a "throw away" directory, like /tmp.  We don't use the
   shell.

6. Type make install at the top level.



It is possible that some necessary steps needed to make the game have been
omitted.  Feel free to ad-lib as necessary.
