If thy wand hath run out of charges, thou mayst zap it again and again; though
naught will happen at first, verily, thy persistence shall be rewarded, as
one last charge may yet be wrested from it!
-----
To complete thy quest, thou needs must enter the infernal regions.  If thou
hast not immunity to fire, such a trip will surely prove to be thy last;
prepare thyself in advance.
-----
Though the shopkeepers be wary, thieves have nevertheless stolen much by using
their digging wands to hasten exits through the pavement.
-----
If thou hast had trouble with rust on thy armor or weapons, thou shouldst know
that thou canst prevent this by, while in a confused state, reading the magical
parchments which normally are used to cause their enchantment.
-----
Behold the cockatrice, whose diminutive stature belies its hidden might.  The
cockatrice can petrify any ordinary being it contacts--save those wise
adventurers who eat a dead lizard or blob of acid when they feel themselves
slowly turning to stone.
-----
While some armor protects against magical attacks, few types compare to the
items which come from the elven regions, though iron or crystalline plate
mail have similar good qualities.
-----
It is well known among travelers that extra-healing draughts may clear thy
senses when thou art addled by hallucinations.  But never forget, the lowly
potion which makes one sick may be used for the same purpose.
-----
If thou hast been confused, thy head may be set straight if thou eatest a
dead lizard and waitest, or drinkest water of the utmost holiness.
-----
If thou wishest to reach deep levels, thou must be able to control thy tele-
ports, and be confused, and read the scroll which usually teleports thyself
around on the level.  Daring adventurers have also performed the same feat
sans need for scrolls or potions by stepping on the correct type of trap.
-----
Almost all adventurers who come this way hope to pass the dread Medusa.  To
do this, the best advice is to keep thine eyes blindfolded and to cause the
creature to espy its own reflection in a mirror.
-----
And where it is written "ad aerarium", diligent searching will often reveal
the way to a trap which sends one to the Magic Memory Vault, where the riches
of Croesus are stored; however, escaping from the vault with its gold is much
harder than getting in.
-----
It is well known that wily shopkeepers doth raise their prices whene'er they
espy the garish apparel of the approaching tourist or the countenance of a
disfavored patron.  They favor the gentle of manner and the fair of face.
The boor may expect unprofitable transactions.
-----
The cliche of the kitchen sink swallowing any unfortunate rings that contact
its pernicious surface reflecteth greater truth than many homilies, yet
even so, few hath developed the skill to identify enchanted rings by the
transfigurations effected upon the voracious device's frame.
-----
The meat of enchanted creatures will ofttimes convey magical properties
unto the consumer.  A fresh corpse of floating eye doth fetch a high
price among wizards for its utility in conferring Telepathy, by which
the sightless may locate surrounding minds.
-----
The detection of blessings and curses is in the domain of the gods.  They will
make this information available to mortals who request it at their places of
worship, or elsewhere for those mortals who devote themselves to the service
of the gods.
-----
The elven dagger Sting is famed for its abilities against all creatures of the
orcish race.  It will glow when such monsters approach, and cause them special
injury.
-----
Adventurers searching for Medusa or the Wizard of Yendor needst not wait until
their dungeon level corresponds with their enemies' to know their location.
Eat a floating eye, blind thyself, and use a mirror in thine own direction,
and provided thou art lucky, thou shalt know the approximate locations of
thine enemies.
-----
In the nethermost recesses of the dungeon, there standeth a castle, wherein
layeth a wand of wishes.  If thou wouldst gain entry, bear with thee an
instrument of music, for the drawbridge may be charmed down with the proper
melody.  What notes comprise it only the gods know, but a musical mastermind
may yet succeed by witful improvization.  However, the less perspicacious are
not without recourse, should they be prepared to circumambulate the castle to
the postern.
